and in his mind he failed and in his
like perception he failed and literally
within a year he was back on meth his
family they didn't have any money he had
abandoned them because of this idea of
failure it was just an idea you see this
behavior all the time in humanity and
it's an amazing thing that just gets in
the way of our transformation welcome
back to the art of accomplishment where
we explore living the life you want with
enjoyment and
ease I'm Brett kler here today with my
co-host Joe hey Brett how's it going on
today's episode we're going to talk
about failure yeah yeah we are we're
going to talk about failure the thing
about failure that is so critical is
that it is just an idea and it's an idea
that when you have it because of the way
that the brain is structured when you
have this idea that I failed your
ability to try again goes way down you
give up far more easily when you have
this idea of oh I failed the idea of
failure which is just an idea is one of
the things that we design our entire
programs to prevent and it is an idea
that when you have it can totally stop
you in your tracks can make it so that
you don't want to try anymore it it is a
structure in the brain called the
habenula that basically its job is to
make sure that you don't fail and so if
you have this idea of failure Your
Capacity to keep on trying and iterating
goes way down and so to really
understand failure can absolutely
transform the way way that you do
personal development work and the way
that you achieve stuff in the world so
to me it's it's critical to think about
failure differently than most people do
the idea of failure is it has to just be
an idea I mean if you take a look at say
Sam Walton right so this guy starts
Walmart you know some people think he's
evil some people think he's great but
whatever it was he was on a boat coming
back from World War II and he thought to
himself you know autocracy is in the
world the problem with them is that they
have a middle class I need to support
the middle class of America so he his
way to do it was to increase the buying
power of the middle class give stock
options to clerks he did all this stuff
to help the middle class oddly you know
it changed over time but that was his
thing that's what he wanted to do and he
failed the first time first five and
dime failed second five and dime failed
third five and dime Walmart right and
then Sam's Club and then everything else
that him and his and his family did the
restoration of the Colorado River and
and all the restoration of the soran and
the stuff they're doing with like rhinos
in in Africa right now all of that
propelled because he apparently failed
but he didn't fail you know and I don't
think anyone's going to look at Sam
Walton and go oh that dude was a failure
so the idea of failure is time limited
like you have to have you have to think
that there is a
time like line on life and that there's
some end to it as long as you don't
think there's an end there is no such
thing as failure there's just the next
iteration the next attempt the next
experiment the next try but if your mind
says no I failed then the way that the
mind is structured with this part of the
brain called the habenula boom you're
going to say oh wow I failed and then
your chances of trying again go way down
how many times you're going to try again
goes way down and so it's really
important to to reframe just the concept
of failure that's really interesting
this this idea of an end because I think
there in our work we talk a lot about
the false end and you know in skydiving
or base jumping we would often say that
any jump you walk away from is a success
and then the cor are there is a jump
that you die on is a failure and it just
seems like duh what what do you have to
say about when when a failure is defined
as well my company ended therefore it's
a failure it's just a failure and now I
move on the problem is so the the part
of the brain called that Bena it's it's
job is to and of course this is
neuroscience so everything's going to
change in 5 10 years but generally the
thing about the habenula it is a
regulator for the dopamine and the
serotonin production and so basically
what it's designed to do is help you
succeed if you're say like a rat running
a maze You' go one way and it doesn't
work this part of the brain is designed
to tell you don't go that way again MH
if you are a bear and you're fighting
for mating rights or a lion fighting for
mating rights and you fail that part of
the brain says don't try again because
you're going to going to get killed so
don't do that like and and that's what
it's designed to do it's designed to say
hey here's how you succeed by not
expressing the reward of of success when
you have failure right and so there's
even studies that show people who are
depressed often have like the habul is
not working in the same way it's
perceiving failure even before it
happens so then you don't even try right
and then if you think about the way
people who are depressed feel as an
example they think about it as there's
no way out there's never going to be a
way out I'm never going to succeed like
this is going to last forever that's
like the symptom of depression and the
habenula is involved in that so
generally the I the and the studies that
have been done and there's this woman
whose Name Escapes Me H we'll put it in
the show notes but her name escapes me
she um she's in one of the Stanford labs
and and what she's discovered is
that people who are successful and I
think the way her study went
was we'll we'll put it in in case I've
got some of this wrong but the way her
study went was she went into populations
that didn't have a lot of resources and
look to see who actually lost weight
when they tried and the people who lost
weight when they tried their mindset was
never I failed their mindset was what's
the next iteration what's the next thing
we do what's the next attempt it's a
constant iterative mindset which you see
in Silicon Valley as well fail fast is
another one like the idea is that
everything that you're doing is an
iteration it's an attempt and it's a
reframing of failure to
experimentation and if you look at like
the way our courses are designed we're
teaching folks that it's not about
failure it's about iteration we do
experiments we don't say here's an
exercise here's what you have to learn
we talk about want over should because
should if I should do it and I don't do
it then I failed and so that creates a
situation where oh I'm trying to get out
of a bad habit and then that moment
where you go back to the bad habit you
don't see it as an iteration you don't
see it as a pendulation you're like oh I
failed and then I'm going to stop trying
what I'm hearing there is that learning
is going to happen either way we're you
know we're evolved to learn no matter
what happens but what we learn depends
on what we make of it and failure is
something that
will however we Define failure failure
causes us to learn to stop trying that
thing which is ultimately keeps us very
safe if it's well calibrated correct as
we become more complex you know adults
how does our sense of failure change
from when we become when when we're
children if we're if we're a child we
might only be able to recognize a
certain level of complexity of you know
the the definition of a task and whether
or not we succeeded or failed and so I
wonder to what extent that kind of
carries forward into our adulthood and
that's kind of what part of what needs
to be deprogrammed and kind of re
reprocessed in in the work the idea is
how do you get into an iterative mindset
how do you redefine or reframe failure
that's the important part so if you look
at kids one of the main things that they
have for their reward system like what's
the cheese at the end of their maze it's
Mom and Dad's love and
attention that's or love and attention
generally yeah right so if they keep on
failing at getting that if they keep on
failing at getting the Attunement that
they need that if they keep on failing
to get the connection that they need if
they keep on failing to get the love
that they need then they grow up
with this incredibly critical voice in
the head telling them that they're
failing all the time even when they're
not I'll give you an example of this my
father was the CEO of a company and that
company fired him and then he got a job
as another CEO of a company and at the
end of that the owners of the company
which was another company so he was the
parent company basically fired him and
said you failed and my dad was just like
I'm a failure and his whole life just
like went down the tubes that's when he
started drinking heavily and everything
he did went wrong and it was just like
it was horrible like just a horrible
thing and later on in life I'm a venture
capitalist and I am walking around this
trade show looking for
Investments and there's this company
it's called Loom energy and I was like
huh that sounds a lot like the company
my Dad ran called Lumin Optics so I went
over I was like what do you guys do and
they told me this is what we do I was
like wow this sounds like a company
called Lumin Optics they're like oh
that's who we used to be I was like
really like like well my dad used to you
know run the company and they're like oh
John Hudson yeah what I found out was
that my dad was so successful at running
the company that the parent
company that didn't want this company to
exist because it was a competitive
product to their main you know
manufacturing facilities and everything
like that basically shelf the company
and they said yeah no and these folks
sued the parent company won $100 million
or something say you shelf up it was a
breach of contract and so they lost $100
million and now with this new $100
million they restarting the company wow
that and so my dad's entire
life went downhill because he thought he
failed when he actually hadn't
failed and and and and so I started to
ask for the numbers literally I'm like
what happened like and and I started
asking for the numbers and I went and
talked to my dad about it too I was like
like tell me the numbers and he
basically turned a company that was
losing something it was like burning
$300,000 and he had turned that around
to only burning 10,000 in less than 10
two years and their revenue had
increased by something like 3 or 400% so
it was definitely on the right
trajectories and I was like your whole
life defined by a failure that didn't
actually exist and so that's this the
crazy thing is like especially somebody
who's depressed you know they can look
at anything and turn it into a failure
they can look at anything and say oh
this is C I didn't 6C I didn't it wasn't
perfect cuz nothing's
perfect nothing is perfect that you can
look at anything and say see I wasn't
perfect I failed yeah and how did that
impact you how old were you when this
occurred and your dad started to see
himself as a
failure yeah it was about the seventh
grade 8th grade some somewhere in there
maybe ninth grade is when it started
happening heavily yeah I mean the
alcoholism that at least to some degree
was propelled by it he was a heavy
drinker already that whole like shame
cycle that he went into yeah I like lost
my dad even more than I had already lost
my dad what actually usually happens is
that like he would take his own self
anger out on me so he yelled at me for
hour and a half over the dinner table
every night M it was crazy this one idea
one idea that he failed where he could
have been like oh I succeeded and those
those guys like you tried to hamstring
me because of the success that I was
having if he had that thought process
he's like I'm a successful CEO my life
his life my sister my mom's all
everybody's life would be different the
crazy thing is is that so I've seen
people do something where they do the
like power positive thinking and so they
don't look at the reality on the ground
right but I don't think that's about
failure and non-failure that's about
like overoptimism or not wanting to feel
your negative emotions it's like a
completely different thing so yeah
you're going to be disappointed yeah
you're going to be sad yeah like I have
been a venture capitalist I've had
companies that I love that have not
succeeded
I had to mourn it's not about like no
everything's going to be okay it's not a
polanish thing but it's also looking at
that and saying yeah that was an
iteration a company did not succeed what
did I learn how does this how does my
next iteration change because of that
like if I'm solving a problem I'm going
to fail if it's a a complicated problem
I'm going to fail many many many times
and if I see them as failure I'm going
to stop I'm not going to want to solve
the problem if I see them as iteration
if I see them as a series of experiments
where I'm learning then I'm always
winning I'm never failing because I'm
always learning and that iterative
mindset is like the important thing and
it and the iterative mindset
particularly I will say when it comes to
personal
transformation it's not just did this
work did this not work what am I going
to iterate on it's like sometimes it's
how long it works right there I remember
many times where I would try a tool and
then it would stop working it worked and
then it would stop working and then it
worked and then it stop working then it
worked and then it stop working and it
took me a long time to realize that the
reason that the tools stopped working
were almost always the same and it was
because they went from Wonder and
inquiry and like what is going on here
to oh I can manage myself through this
tool yeah and as soon as I tried to
manage myself I wasn't actually
welcoming my experience and the tool
stopped working and so there was this
recognition of even even the idea of I
need to manage myself sets up failure
because at some point you can't always
manage yourself you're going to fail and
then the whole thing goes apart where if
it's like oh it's just an exploration
I'm just learning then the tools keep on
working something that I'm noticing here
is that in in the instances you were
talking about like what your what Your
Dad could have learned from that
experience what we could have learned
from any experience that we labeled as
failure or what we could have learned
from an experience that we were kind of
polyanic kind of grazing over the top of
is that there's a lot more subtle to to
reality than we previously had modeled
and to get there there's a lot of
emotions we have to feel we have to sit
with that complexity sounds like what
we're talking about here with failure
it's like a inverse polyana where it's
like I don't want to feel all of what I
have to feel perhaps your dad might have
had to actually recognize that he had
succeeded and that wasn't actually
enough for the company because other
forces outside of his
control were were happening and there'd
be heartbreak in that and so how much is
failure or this idea of
failure like the the perhaps the
premature idea of failure or the
simplistic story of failure that
prevents us from really getting The Full
Experience how much is that a protection
or Identity or avoiding an emotional
experience the interesting thing is like
if you bring that all the way into where
it goes really deep like in depression
where the person's like why even get up
why even live right because I'm just
it's just going to all be [__] that's
how far this thing goes right like
everything I've done is failure why even
get up why now I is just [__] it I'm
just going to kill myself right I'm
going to like is that an identity that's
a great question like you know what
what's actually happening there leaving
that place I'm sure is going to be scary
right and so somehow or another being
where you are even if it's hell is
somehow more comforting than being in
someplace new if you feel like you're
failing don't try and so to me I I would
say that the emotional
avoidance is is something that is really
important and is going to allow you to
succeed and reframing failure is
something that's really important and is
going to allow you to succeed I mean
I've told this story before know I have
a a guy who cuts my hair who's this
great artist and I've done this many
times now and he wasn't being able to
sell in Galleries and I said to him look
hey man I'll give you a th000 bucks if
you get whatever I can't remember
anymore 2550 rejections inside of a
month or two or whatever it was every
failure was a success that reframe he
was like oh I'm closer to getting to my
goal of $1,000 and then now he's like a
working artist because Gallery said yes
but the reframe was I am winning if I
get failures that's all he needed was
that reframe so now I'm curious for you
know for listeners here uh I'm I'm
hearing like a number of possible entry
points for for doing this work one of
them is taking an inventory or account
of like what stories do you have of
failure like there's and then there's
the explicit ones that you tell yourself
every day and then there's implicit ones
that have just be kind of become kind of
baked into the subconscious like I'm
just not that kind of person I'm not an
artist because somebody didn't like my
art once because I failed when I was a
kid yeah exactly to start with that with
the Excavating of failure stories what's
what's something that listeners could do
as a practice or as an experiment to
start to excavate those stories to
investigate them more deeply yeah I
think is the investigation but I'm not
sure how necessary that is for reframing
let's say you've always tried to lose
weight and you haven't succeeded as an
example what we normally do is we say oh
we're going to do this diet we're going
to try x amount of time goes by then we
fail in some way and we give up right
next time you want to lose weight sit
down and write 50 experiments you can
run about losing weight I'm going to do
an atic diet I'm going to do a a
traditional Chinese medicine diet I'm
going to do the Atkins diet I'm going to
try this exercise this exercise this
exercise I'm going to like literally
like I'm going to count calories oh I'm
going to control my blood sugar I'm
going to wear a blood sugar monitor I'm
going to work with my hormones like
there's so many ideas and I of how to
lose weight write down every experiment
that you're going to do and then do them
in order oh so now oh I failed at that
it becomes oh I tried that now I'm going
to try this and what do I learn what am
I going to try this what am I going to
learn and each one of those is going to
teach you something about your situation
about how you think about food about how
you think about weight about how you
think about exercise how do I enjoy it
I'm this week I'm going to exercise but
my number one job is to enjoy it this
week I'm going to exercise and and I'm
going to try to do like the heaviest
cardio that I can do this week it's all
going to be about weight and strength
whatever like just experiment after
experiment so to me more important than
going back into and Excavating the ideas
of failure which I think is important is
to start to get a taste of what it is to
reframe the idea of failure because once
you have that then the exploration I
think is much easier than if you are
going to explore stuff but you don't
have a taste of what it is to have an
iterative mindset yeah yeah and when I
say excavation one of those one of the
reasons for that is simply so you have
something to reframe like because a lot
of that could be subconscious oh yeah
yeah so I would say the first place to
reframe that's great the first place to
reframe is the thing that you want to do
next is that thing that you want in life
that you've been not able to achieve
whether that is like uh finding a lover
finding a husband or a wife losing
weight um starting a business blah blah
blah like take whatever that thing is
that's been hard for you that you don't
want to go out and do because you feel
like you fail every time you do it and
come up with 50 or 60 iterations that
you can try let's say somebody does this
work they they do some reframing you
know a lot of times people will continue
to self-sabotage what they think they
want and it'll be a fear of success
that's actually underneath that sabotage
how do you how would you relate the fear
of success to the propensity to develop
a story of failure so I think to some
degree the iterative mindset helps with
the fear of success because every time
you're iterating you're starting to
taste
success not success in the goal because
there's no more goal right like the
whole thing about iterative mindset is
that you kind of have a North star
you're like oh I want to up here but the
way I'm going to get there isn't by
getting there my the way I'm going to
get there is just learning I'm just
going to learn enough that eventually
that problem gets solved if you're like
trying to solve a puzzle and you're and
you come into that puzzle and you're
like I want to solve this puzzle I want
to solve this puzzle I want to solve
this puzzle the impartiality of you goes
away and you're just going to be like
get frustrated and more frustrated I
don't want to do this anymore [__] this
right but if you're like oh I'm just
here to learn about the puzzle what is
this what is that how do I do this how
do I do that eventually that puzzle get
solved it just does eventually you're
going to learn enough where they just
the awareness just the learning is going
to solve the problem for you and so the
more that you can have your Northstar as
like this thing out there but your
objective in the the partiality you have
is just to learn not to get to the end
the quicker the whole process goes I I
love how a lot of what you're saying
here in the reframing is that you're
reframing the criteria for Success from
an outcome to a process like I'm
succeeding if I'm iterating I'm
succeeding if I'm learning and I trust
that if I'm iterating and I'm learning
I'm going to get a better result tracing
this back to the fear of success I think
a lot of times a fear of success is
actually a projected future fear of
failure like what if my art ends up in
Galleries and then I'm judged that's a
huge part of it and there's also the
part of the emotional experience of like
oh my God I'm winning I feel good like
that is scary it's scary to have really
positive emotions and and you know you
can see it the like pleasures of
available to us at any minute any day
just by the way that we breathe and most
people are not experiencing it because
it's a little bit scary so I do think
that those are the two main things that
make the fear of success happen is that
expansive feeling that is overwhelming
and oh now I'm going to be able to fail
on a bigger stage as people start to
work with a different way of being often
we'll try that new way of being and then
something will happen and we'll revert
back to an old one and so one way that
that might look is somebody's like okay
you know what I'm going to start
experimenting I'm to try to get a bunch
of rejections and then they step out
there and they get a particularly
painful possibly public rejection and
then that they just go straight back
into the failure there's like an
implosion how how can somebody be ready
for that or uh be prepared for such a
moment where they've changed their way
of being and then all of a sudden they
step on a rake and have that experience
and be able to reframe even that without
imploding that's where some emotional
fluidity is really really useful the
framing itself self that's stepping on a
Rake The Rake that you step on means
that your reframing really wasn't
complete MH I'll give you an example of
this one of the things you'll notice
about all of our work is that we never
talk about self-improvement we only talk
about self-awareness or self realization
or understanding yourself the reason we
do that is because you will fail at
self-improvement like the the the
framing of self-improvement is failure
is there will be a failure in it
self-awareness you can't fail at you
just keep on learning and iterating so
if that rake happens it means somewhere
in the
reframe the reframing hasn't been
complete right and so or there's an
emotion that you don't want to feel
right so there there's still going to be
disappointment there's still going to be
sadness there's still going to be you
know like all the all the feelings of
fear and all that stuff there's there
they're not going away with the
reframing and so it's still really
important to feel them and to process
them and to let them all move through as
we talk about in other
podcasts and so if you step on the
breake feel the emotion that you need to
feel and then go back to the list and
that's why I say put that list up front
if you put that list up front before you
attempt do your first thing write that
whole list down because then it's just
like oh what's the next experiment and
frame it so that every time you make a
check on an experiment it's a win like
you're checking off a task list you know
every one of those is a win so it's like
that it's like oh win win win yeah and
feel the emotions that you have to feel
on the way through I think that's
something to watch for too if people try
these iterations in these experiments
and they continue to have the same
stories of failure come back out of it
then it's probably a sign that there's
some emotional experience that you have
been creating a little wall around with
that story of failure and that's
something to explore a lot of the time
the story of failure is designed to not
allow you to feel a certain emotion
that's the thing with depression we talk
about like one of the main things that
I've seen work to have people move
through depression is allow their anger
to move and so a lot of the time what
that what's doing that feeling of
failure is doing is making it so you
don't have to get angry at Mom and Dad
for not being attuned to not loving
always being critical you know and so
like because you couldn't feel that as a
kid because they they would just [__]
annihilate you if you're freaking 2ot
tall and there's a 6ot tall person
yelling at you that's not a place where
anger is safe to go and it may even be
protecting you from losing the idea of
an ideal parent like losing that ideal I
failed in earning their love then that's
perhaps easier the world is less unsafe
to me than me taking on the belief at
age4 that my parents are just as
confused as as as I am right now the
world is not safe even in the way that
it's supposed to be for me correct yeah
this thing goes so deep the most
horrific story that I have around this
still makes me sad to talk about it is I
was in my 20s I was recording an album
and met this guy who was restoring
habitat named Fred and now like the
Godfather of my child and he had a guy
working for him who was an amazing human
being you know just amazing he at some
point was like living in his car on meth
in the drug game and turned his life
around and he was a loving human being
being he had kids who were generous who
were openhearted he took in kids from
other homes like if there was like a kid
that he found and even though they
didn't have money they were always like
yeah you just come in live in the garage
like and so they had their family they
had other kids from the area that didn't
have good parents and like just and and
like when I went over to his house the
first time his 8-year-old offered me his
toy he's like here's the toy like you
can have it he was just providing this
amazing nest of and he just really cared
about his kids and his eldest son which
was I think the the son that kind of
brought him out of his meth Haze and and
Drug
Haze when he was like 17 noticed he was
drinking too much noticed that there was
a problem and he started he went to he
said Hey Dad I want to go to rehab I
want to do
therapy and his dad saw that as a
failure I I
failed I like my son was supposed to
I was I did all this work and my son is
still is having problems he's going to
repeat the life that I had I remember
talking to him I'm like dude I don't
think you screwed up I think like for a
kid to be able to see that they needed
that and ask for it for themselves like
that's a huge win and he was like no
that's total failure inside of a year he
was back on meth and he was living in a
car again I saw the wife maybe like a
year later and she was just like yeah
they they didn't have the money cuz he
was providing and so the whole family
fell apart because he had idea that he
failed wasn't even a true thing this is
something that's in the water we swim in
in culture and often shows up in
companies and it can be in families like
like you were just describing I'm
curious now how much the son feels like
he failed because the father went that
way and it was a result of his blah blah
blah what can somebody who's let's say
who's a leader in a team or a parent
running an organization anything when
somebody's kind of in charge of the
culture or at least curating what's that
this can be brought into into a company
culture or a or a group the most
important one is to like frame the thing
from the beginning is that there can't
be fail failure so like the my best
example of this is I think it was like
Nike in the '90s over there like you'd
walk into their main Seattle
headquarters and they had a 4x8 so like
the size of a piece of plywood sign all
done by push pin and there was black
push pins and white push pins and it
just said fail bigger immediately you
walk in and they have
framed success as large
failures like boom like so so any way
you can do the framing up front this is
an IT process fail fast fail you know
fail often fail fast learning like just
to see everything in that way to set a
up a goal even I've seen people set up
goals of iterations instead of we're
going to get here we're going to run
seven iterations it's the same thing in
like U tracking sales data are you
tracking how much money they brought in
eventually you're going to have to but
the best thing to track is how many
phone calls they made the best thing to
track is how many moves down a pipeline
did they make you're creating success in
something that they can actually
do instead of something that is somewhat
beyond their control so it's like oh if
you take these steps you will get here
so we're going to we're going to talk
about the iteration of these steps
rather
than the like long-term goal for for the
for the metrics so framing it from the
beginning is one way to do it second is
to reward failure I and I've seen this
in companies who had the biggest failure
like the most bold failure who's the one
who tried something and actually reward
that if you if you truly understand this
that is not a scary thing to do that is
a no-brainer like you want Innovation
from your company and you know The
Innovation is going to cost you money
this is the way it costs you money is
people trying stuff everybody has their
own set of experiments so to reward that
I think is like an amazing thing to do
the other thing is don't get angry when
people [__] up in our company recently
we had well I guess it was a couple
years ago now but that somebody made a
$50,000 mistake I walked into the office
and they're like oh [__] I'm so sorry
Joe I think I made 50 I just said no
problem there was Zero emotional
backlash for me there was just like yeah
w wow that sucks okay how are we going
to handle it and I imagine there was
some anger to process at some point
somehow no there wasn't I was you never
had a moment in this particular case for
them yeah definitely not for me because
because of my reframing on it is so
strong there'll be anger if I don't see
progress being made right if if I get
frustrated if I don't see the
pace but if I see someone trying
something and it doesn't work or
somebody making a mistake I'm totally
good with it
I'm not good with the fact that that
pace isn't being kept that's what will
cause me frustration maybe like a
mistake being made two or three times in
a row for no like not that's a whole
different thing nobody wants to make
mistakes so if they're making a mistake
it means they're most likely trying
something and and that's an important
part of how we grow as a business this
seems like another clear example of
reframing ref reframing success from
outcomes to process to
learnings even down to principles it
sounds like a lot of what you're just
describing here is like if if the
principles are being followed if we're
if we're living by the principles then
we can consider that a success and if if
we're not getting the results we want
then we can examine the principles yeah
and that I think that's a big thing like
in families it's especially families
with young
kids you know so Esme and I talked about
this on our P podcast recently about her
talking seeing like a family like
correcting their kids from doing the
dishes they're doing the dishes and then
they correct them and so for that kid
they're learning that they're failure
they're learning that they can't even
wash dishes without being corrected
that's a like a deeply disempowering
move that people make so it's really
important that when you're working in a
family situation that the iteration is
far more important than the success I do
that with my kids all the time like even
if if they mess up on something
sometimes I'm like I just don't even say
anything maybe I'll go back and fix it
but I won't let them know about it or
maybe I'll be like hey you know here's
this other component you know do you
want to think about doing that how do
you want to do that but I'm not going to
criticize I'm not going to step in and
do it it just doesn't help them have the
self-esteem doesn't help them be
empowered doesn't help them learn you
know none of that
works at least for normal life I maybe
when it comes to like being the best
celloist in the world there's some
criticism M needed I don't know but well
critique I say which might be different
which might be different yeah but for
just normal life it's not really
required know and then the other thing
is like with families is if you notice
like little kids their hands don't go
over their heads the way like a an adult
does they're like their wrists kind of
go to like their ears when they're small
enough right and so you can imagine that
when our kids were like I don't know 2
and a half 3 years old they were setting
the table the table was higher than them
they were holding the dish above their
head and then sliding it onto the table
and to us that was really important it
was really important for them to know
that they were capable and yeah we broke
imagine we broke some dishes we broke
some dishes you
like but like to to us it that was the
framing the framing was the attempt was
more important than the success yeah one
thing that I'm imagining this could all
bump up against in somebody is a fear of
recklessness if I were to try this on
then I might become Reckless and if I
were to do that as like a bass jumper
I'm like oh you know what I'm just going
to try and fail a bunch of things then
that might actually lead to my death
what would you have to say to somebody
who's like but what I do is really high
stakes tens of thousands of people
depend on this getting right because I'm
running a big company or whatever I
can't afford to be Reckless just to say
on the base jumping side just as a great
example that you you framed you've
already framed it so that that you can't
fail or that when you fail you're dead
anyway so like it doesn't really matter
right if I live then it was a success so
walk away you've already done the
reframing a as a way to like that that's
the nature how people go and do things
like base jumping is they reframe
failure and so you you've already done
it so I just point that out there is
this thing like you know if I make this
decision then the economy of the Free
World could collapse right then like
like do some experiments like find you
know find a very small democracy and try
to do the financial engineering there do
it within a company like the the idea is
how do I run the simplest experiment
that I can learn the most in the
shortest amount of time when you are
practicing you you better be iterating
you better be trying over and over and
over again there's a lot of interesting
research on this how how important it is
to go back and forth between like
performance and play performance and
play performance and play and in
something like like Wing suiting people
often think wow there's no margin for
error really there's lots of margin for
error there's just specific margins that
you need to maintain and then within
those margins there's actually a lot
that you can do what you do in that
space is what increases your capacity
your skill your awareness your body
awareness and yeah and everything else I
love that because that's even the idea
performance and play basically means a
place where you can fail and a place
where you can't fail and so play in
itself like when you watch kids no one's
like I failed at playing like kids
adults might do that I didn't have
enough fun generally like kids don't
fail at playing and they're constantly
learning and they're growing and they
learn and grow really really quickly
because they're in this state of play
all the time and there's a huge amount
of data now that shows that like how
important it is for kids to have free
play time when we say connection over
Perfection it's the exact same thing
we're reframing it when we say wants
over should it's the exact same thing
we're saying like you can't fail in your
wants you can fail in the shoulds you
can fail in Perfection you can't fail in
connection it's like everything we do is
built is reframing the experience that
way no that if that got taken away we
would not get the results that we get
because it's like we're just sitting
there experimenting and learning and
it's and it's why like it is the entire
system that I did and that I was lucky
enough to do because I just hated
Authority and I just got really lucky
that that is just a really that
iterative mindset is just very very
productive and very very enjoyable too
one last observation on this topic of
reframing is that what what this does
essentially is it brings the enjoyment
of play into the you know performance of
high stakes as deeply as as one can
which just deepens the learning and the
and the enjoyment and ultimately doesn't
have to sacrifice performance it can
increase in deep it doesn't yeah it
doesn't it doesn't it does the exact
opposite especially over the long term
yeah like especially over the time frame
of years or decades there's this great
quote I think I heard it I think I heard
it from Tony Robbins and it was um
people always over estimate what they
can do in a year and underestimate what
they can do in a decade and if you look
at like what the iterative mindset does
in a decade like every company that I
know that has disrupted a industry
inside of a decade has been very very
iterative in their approach maybe you
don't lose weight this year but you will
be healthy if you constantly iterate on
your health the great example of this is
Mark who works with us like when you
talk to him about his health it's just
like a thousand iterations he has done
over decades and you look at him you're
like holy crap that dude is so healthy
and this episode is another example of
our iterative process
uh yes it is thanks for listening to the
art of accomplishment to hear more about
how to use failure to your advantage you
can join our newsletter or check out our
courses at artof accomplishment.